Update documentation on data flow in Go (and some small fixes for java) (#18511)
github/codeql: docs/codeql/codeql-language-guides/analyzing-data-flow-in-go.rst

.. _analyzing-data-flow-in-go:

Analyzing data flow in Go
=========================

You can use CodeQL to track the flow of data through a Go program to its use.

About this article
------------------

This article describes how data flow analysis is implemented in the CodeQL libraries for Go and includes examples to help you write your own data flow queries.
The following sections describe how to use the libraries for local data flow, global data flow, and taint tracking.

For a more general introduction to modeling data flow, see ":ref:`About data flow analysis <about-data-flow-analysis>`."

.. include:: ../reusables/new-data-flow-api.rst

Local data flow
---------------

Local data flow is data flow within a single method or callable. Local data flow is usually easier, faster, and more precise than global data flow, and is sufficient for many queries.

Using local data flow
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The ``DataFlow`` module defines the class ``Node`` denoting any element that data can flow through.
The ``Node`` class has a number of useful subclasses, such as ``ExprNode`` for expressions, ``ParameterNode`` for parameters, and ``InstructionNode`` for control-flow nodes.

> You can map between data flow nodes and expressions/control-flow nodes/parameters using the member predicates ``asExpr``, ``asParameter`` and ``asInstructionNode``:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can map between data flow nodes and expressions/control-flow nodes/parameters using the member predicates ``asExpr``, ``asParameter`` and ``asInstruction``:
```

.. code-block:: ql

   /**
    * Gets the `Node` corresponding to `e`.
    */
   ExprNode exprNode(Expr e) { ... }

   /**
    * Gets the `Node` corresponding to the value of `p` at function entry.
    */
   ParameterNode parameterNode(Parameter p) { ... }

   /**
    * Gets the `Node` corresponding to `insn`.
    */
   InstructionNode instructionNode(IR::Instruction insn) { ... }

The predicate ``localFlowStep(Node nodeFrom, Node nodeTo)`` holds if there is an immediate data flow edge from the node ``nodeFrom`` to the node ``nodeTo``. You can apply the predicate recursively by using the ``+`` and ``*`` operators, or by using the predefined recursive predicate ``localFlow``, which is equivalent to ``localFlowStep*``.

For example, you can find flow from a parameter ``source`` to an expression ``sink`` in zero or more local steps:

.. code-block:: ql

   DataFlow::localFlow(DataFlow::parameterNode(source), DataFlow::exprNode(sink))

Using local taint tracking
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Local taint tracking extends local data flow by including non-value-preserving flow steps. For example:

.. code-block:: go

     temp := x;
     y := temp + ", " + temp;

> If ``x`` is a tainted string then ``y`` is also tainted.

Author: I agree it's an odd example, with the capacity for confusion.  I've changed it to just (each language's version of) `y := "Hello " + x` in all the language guides where it appears.

> If ``x`` is a tainted string then ``y`` is also tainted.

Reviewer 2: Although I'd be surprised if we have a language where (the equivalent of) `temp := x` requires taint-flow analysis, I'd be careful with just changing examples for other languages.

> If ``x`` is a tainted string then ``y`` is also tainted.

Author: I've advertised the change more widely among the language teams.

For example, you can find taint propagation from a parameter ``source`` to an expression ``sink`` in zero or more local steps:

.. code-block:: ql

   TaintTracking::localTaint(DataFlow::parameterNode(source), DataFlow::exprNode(sink))

Examples
~~~~~~~~

This query finds the filename passed to ``os.Open(..)``.

.. code-block:: ql

   import go

   from Function osOpen, CallExpr call
   where
     osOpen.hasQualifiedName("os", "Open") and
     call.getTarget() = osOpen
   select call.getArgument(0)

Unfortunately, this only gives the expression in the argument, not the values which could be passed to it. So we use local data flow to find all expressions that flow into the argument:

.. code-block:: ql

   import go

   from Function osOpen, CallExpr call, Expr src
   where
     osOpen.hasQualifiedName("os", "Open") and
     call.getTarget() = osOpen and
     DataFlow::localFlow(DataFlow::exprNode(src), DataFlow::exprNode(call.getArgument(0)))
   select src

> Then we can make the source more specific, for example an access to a parameter. This query finds where a public parameter is passed to ``os.Open(..)``:

Author: I slightly prefer the original. It has more narrative flow ("start with a simple query, then slowly add restrictions to get something more interesting"). Can you explain what you don't like about it, and how your suggestion is an improvement?

> Then we can make the source more specific, for example an access to a parameter. This query finds where a public parameter is passed to ``os.Open(..)``:

Reviewer 2: The narrative is good, and I wouldn't change that. The intention with my suggestion was to keep it as well. However, the flow/grammar/style of the first sentence that's currently here isn't great:

- Since the reader will have looked over / thought about / possibly played with the code before this, the `Then ...` feels disconnected here as an opening to the paragraph. It implies that we are continuing some line of work, even though the code example accomplished everything the previous paragraph set out to do. This is why, in my suggestion, the sentence begins by setting out what the next goal is.
- "the source" is ambiguous and possibly misleading. Does it refer to the input to `localFlow` or (the) source discovered by evaluating the query? If a reader assumes the latter case, "the" implies that this query only ever finds one source.
- Similarly with "access to a parameter". 
- The "[..], for example [..]" fragment doesn't read right. It might be better if there was a verb in it (e.g. ", for example by constraining [the source(s)] to function parameters")

Also, while going through this again, does `Parameter` give us parameters _or_ variable accesses to parameters?

> Then we can make the source more specific, for example an access to a parameter. This query finds where a public parameter is passed to ``os.Open(..)``:

Author: `Parameter` extends `DeclaredVariable`, so I'm pretty sure it's parameters rather than variable accesses to parameters.

.. code-block:: ql

   import go

   from Function osOpen, CallExpr call, Parameter p
   where
     osOpen.hasQualifiedName("os", "Open") and
     call.getTarget() = osOpen and
     DataFlow::localFlow(DataFlow::parameterNode(p), DataFlow::exprNode(call.getArgument(0)))
   select p

> This query finds calls to formatting functions where the format string is not hard-coded.

Author: * Lots of the language guides says "This query ...:". Would using a colon at the end of this sentence (and other equivalent ones) solve the problem? Or would you still like "The following"?
* I agree it could be clearer, but that is a bigger change than I want to do in this PR.

> This query finds calls to formatting functions where the format string is not hard-coded.

Reviewer 2: > Would using a colon at the end of this sentence (and other equivalent ones) solve the problem? Or would you still like "The following"?

Yes, a colon would help, but resolving the ambiguity at the start of the sentence would still be good as well since it then doesn't require the reader to read/scan the entire sentence to know what it's about.

> This query finds calls to formatting functions where the format string is not hard-coded.

Author: I've tried to do this for multiple languages.

.. code-block:: ql

   import go

   from StringOps::Formatting::Range format, CallExpr call, Expr formatString
   where
     call.getTarget() = format and
     formatString = call.getArgument(format.getFormatStringIndex()) and
     not exists(DataFlow::Node source, DataFlow::Node sink |
       DataFlow::localFlow(source, sink) and
       source.asExpr() instanceof StringLit and
       sink.asExpr() = formatString
     )
   select call, "Argument to String format method isn't hard-coded."

Exercises
~~~~~~~~~

Exercise 1: Write a query that finds all hard-coded strings used to create a ``url.URL``, using local data flow. (`Answer <#exercise-1>`__)

Global data flow
----------------

Global data flow tracks data flow throughout the entire program, and is therefore more powerful than local data flow. However, global data flow is less precise than local data flow, and the analysis typically requires significantly more time and memory to perform.

.. pull-quote:: Note

   .. include:: ../reusables/path-problem.rst

Using global data flow
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The global data flow library is used by implementing the signature ``DataFlow::ConfigSig`` and applying the module ``DataFlow::Global<ConfigSig>``:

Author: How about this:
```suggestion
To use the global data flow library, implement the signature ``DataFlow::ConfigSig`` and apply the module ``DataFlow::Global<ConfigSig>``:
```

I note that java has this: `You use the global data flow library by implementing the signature ``DataFlow::ConfigSig`` and applying the module ``DataFlow::Global<ConfigSig>``:` . I don't like it, though it is in the active voice.

> The global data flow library is used by implementing the signature ``DataFlow::ConfigSig`` and applying the module ``DataFlow::Global<ConfigSig>``:

Reviewer 2: I also don't like using the second person ("You") for this. Third-person, active voice is best in my opinion. Your suggestion with the imperative voice is OK.

> The global data flow library is used by implementing the signature ``DataFlow::ConfigSig`` and applying the module ``DataFlow::Global<ConfigSig>``:

Author: Hmm, didn't your suggestion use "we", which is first person, rather than third person?

> The global data flow library is used by implementing the signature ``DataFlow::ConfigSig`` and applying the module ``DataFlow::Global<ConfigSig>``:

Reviewer 2: Sorry, I meant to write "first person plural".

.. code-block:: ql

   import go

   module MyFlowConfiguration implements DataFlow::ConfigSig {
     predicate isSource(DataFlow::Node source) {
       ...
     }

     predicate isSink(DataFlow::Node sink) {
       ...
     }
   }

   module MyFlow = DataFlow::Global<MyFlowConfiguration>;

These predicates are defined in the configuration:

-  ``isSource`` - defines where data may flow from.
-  ``isSink`` - defines where data may flow to.

> -  ``isBarrier`` - optional, restricts the data flow.

Reviewer 2: Is there a better description than "restricts"? All the predicates "restrict" data flow in some way.
```suggestion
-  ``isBarrier`` - optional, breaks the data flow.
```

Author: I've changed this to `optional, defines where data flow is blocked` in all the language guides where it appears.

-  ``isAdditionalFlowStep`` - optional, adds additional flow steps.

The data flow analysis is performed using the predicate ``flow(DataFlow::Node source, DataFlow::Node sink)``:

.. code-block:: ql

   from DataFlow::Node source, DataFlow::Node sink
   where MyFlow::flow(source, sink)
   select source, "Data flow to $@.", sink, sink.toString()

Using global taint tracking
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Global taint tracking is to global data flow what local taint tracking is to local data flow. That is, global taint tracking extends global data flow with additional non-value-preserving steps. The global taint tracking library is used by applying the module ``TaintTracking::Global<ConfigSig>`` to your configuration instead of ``DataFlow::Global<ConfigSig>``:

.. code-block:: ql

   import go

   module MyFlowConfiguration implements DataFlow::ConfigSig {
     predicate isSource(DataFlow::Node source) {
       ...
     }

     predicate isSink(DataFlow::Node sink) {
       ...
     }
   }

   module MyFlow = TaintTracking::Global<MyFlowConfiguration>;

The resulting module has an identical signature to the one obtained from ``DataFlow::Global<ConfigSig>``.

Flow sources
~~~~~~~~~~~~

> The data flow library contains some predefined flow sources. The class ``RemoteFlowSource`` (defined in ``semmle.code.java.dataflow.FlowSources``) represents data flow sources that may be controlled by a remote user, which is useful for finding security problems.

Reviewer: Should we note / recommend `ActiveThreatModelSource`?

Author: I think that's more advanced. This guide gives a simple approach that works. (Also, if we want to do that, we should do it separately for all the languages.)

Examples
~~~~~~~~

This query shows a taint-tracking configuration that uses remote user input as data sources.

.. code-block:: ql

   import go

   module MyFlowConfiguration implements DataFlow::ConfigSig {
     predicate isSource(DataFlow::Node source) {
       source instanceof RemoteFlowSource
     }

     ...
   }

   module MyTaintFlow = TaintTracking::Global<MyFlowConfiguration>;

Exercises
~~~~~~~~~

> Exercise 2: Write a query that finds all hard-coded strings used to create a ``url.URL``, using global data flow. (`Answer <#exercise-2>`__)

Reviewer 2: Same concern about "hard-coded".

Exercise 3: Write a class that represents flow sources from ``os.Getenv(..)``. (`Answer <#exercise-3>`__)

> Exercise 4: Using the answers from 2 and 3, write a query which finds all global data flows from ``os.Getenv`` to ``url.URL``. (`Answer <#exercise-4>`__)

Reviewer 2: "Data flows" sounds odd to me. How about "data flow paths" instead?
```suggestion
Exercise 4: Using the answers from 2 and 3, write a query which finds all global data flow paths from ``os.Getenv`` to ``url.URL``. (`Answer <#exercise-4>`__)
```

Author: I've done this for all the language guides where it appears.

         (
           urlParse.hasQualifiedName("url", "Parse") or
           urlParse.hasQualifiedName("url", "ParseRequestURI")
         ) and
         call.getTarget() = urlParse and
         sink.asExpr() = call.getArgument(0)
       )
     }
   }

   module LiteralToURLFlow = DataFlow::Global<LiteralToURLConfig>;

   from DataFlow::Node src, DataFlow::Node sink
   where LiteralToURLFlow::flow(src, sink)
   select src, "This string constructs a URL $@.", sink, "here"

Exercise 3
~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: ql

   import go

   class GetenvSource extends CallExpr {
     GetenvSource() {
       exists(Function m | m = this.getTarget() |
         m.hasQualifiedName("os", "Getenv")
       )
     }
   }

Exercise 4
~~~~~~~~~~

.. code-block:: ql

   import go

   class GetenvSource extends CallExpr {
     GetenvSource() {
       exists(Function m | m = this.getTarget() |
         m.hasQualifiedName("os", "Getenv")
       )
     }
   }

   module GetenvToURLConfig implements DataFlow::ConfigSig {
     predicate isSource(DataFlow::Node source) {
       source instanceof GetenvSource
     }

     predicate isSink(DataFlow::Node sink) {
       exists(Function urlParse, CallExpr call |

>          (
>            urlParse.hasQualifiedName("url", "Parse") or
>            urlParse.hasQualifiedName("url", "ParseRequestURI")
>          ) and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
         urlParse.hasQualifiedName("url", ["Parse", "ParseRequestURI"]) and
```

Author: I deliberately didn't do this because I think it's a bit harder to understand. I think this guide should just be a simple approach that is easy to understand and which works.

Reviewer 2: You could mention it as a note underneath the example. "For brevity, we could also shorten `...` to `...`".

Author: To my mind, the aim of this guide is not to give the best way to write things, but to help the reader use data flow and to be as clear as possible. I think that introducing a new notation to do the same thing  does not help with that, especially when it isn't very easy to see at a glance what it is doing.

Using global data flow
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> We can use the global data flow library by implementing the signature ``DataFlow::ConfigSig`` and applying the module ``DataFlow::Global<ConfigSig>``:

Reviewer 2: Minor: "applying the module ``DataFlow::Global<ConfigSig>``" has the potential to be confusing if readers don't realise that `ConfigSig` is the expected type of the type parameter / how module instantiation works in QL. Perhaps this could refer to the example below as illustration. 

Perhaps (additionally or alternatively) this could link to https://codeql.github.com/docs/ql-language-reference/modules/#parameterized-modules or similar.

-  ``isSource`` - defines where data may flow from.
-  ``isSink`` - defines where data may flow to.

> -  ``isBarrier`` - optional, defines where data flow is blocked.

Reviewer 2: Minor: There's probably a better way to word this still, especially to better communicate that this is a desirable thing to do, but this shouldn't _block_ this PR.
